Music
Traditionally in computation
and processing data
we would bring the data to the computer.
You'd wanna program
and you'd bring the data into the program.
In a big data cluster
what Larry Page and Sergey Brin
came up with is very pretty simple
is they took the data and they sliced it
into pieces and they distributed each
and they replicated each piece
or triplicated each piece
and they would send it
the pieces of these files
to thousands of computers
first it was hundreds but
then now it's thousands
now it's tens of thousands.
And then they would send the same program
to all these computers in the cluster.
And each computer would run the program
on its little piece of the file
and send the results back.
The results would then be sorted
and those results would
then be redistributed
back to another process.
The first process is called
a map or a mapper process
and the second one was
called a reduce process.
Fairly simple concepts
but turned out that you could do
lots and lots of different kinds of
handle lots and lots of
different kinds of problems
and very, very, very large data sets.
So the one thing that's nice
about these big data clusters
is they scale linearly.
You had twice as many servers
and you get twice the performance
and you can handle twice
the amount of data.
So this was just broke a bottleneck
for all the major social media companies.
Yahoo then got on board.
Yahoo hired someone named Doug Cutting
who had been working
on a clone or a copy
of the Google big data architecture
and now that's called Hadoop.
And if you google Hadoop you'll see that
it's now a very popular term
and there are many, many, many
if you look at the big data ecology
there are hundreds of thousands
of companies out there
that have some kind of footprint
in the big data world.
(music)
Most of the components of data
science have been around for
many, many, many, many decades.
But they're all coming together now
with some new nuances I guess.
At the bottom of data science
you see probability and statistics.
You see algebra, linear algebra
you see programming
and you see databases.
They've all been here.
But what's happened now is we
now have the computational capabilities
to apply some new techniques
- machine learning.
Where now we can take really large data sets
and instead of taking a sample
and trying to test some hypothesis
we can take really, really large data sets
and look for patterns.
And so back off one level
from hypothesis testing
to finding patterns that maybe
will generate hypotheses.
Now this can bother some very
traditional statisticians
and gets them really annoyed sometimes
that you know you're
supposed to have a hypothesis
that is not that is
independent of the data
and then you test it.
So once some of these machine
learning techniques started
were really the only thing
the only way you can analyze
some of these really large
social media data sets.
So what we've seen is that the combination
of traditional [technique] areas computer science
probability, statistics, mathematics
all coming together in
this thing that we call
Decision Sciences.
Our department at Stern
I'll give a little plug here
we happen to have been very well situated
among business schools
because we're one of
the few business schools
that has a real statistics department
with real PhD level statisticians in it.
We have an operations
management department
and an information systems department.
So we have a wide range
of computer scientists
to statisticians, to
operations researchers.
And so we were like perfectly positioned
as a couple of other business schools were
to jump on this bandwagon and say; okay
this is Decision Sciences.
And Foster Provost who's
in my department was
the first director of the
NYU Center for Data Science.
(music)
Four years ago maybe five years ago.
I mean, I feel this is one of those cases
where you can just to Google
and search for
data science and see how often it occurred
and you'll see almost nothing
and then just a spike.
The same thing you would see with big data
about seven or eight years ago.
So data science is a
term I haven't heard of
probably five years ago.
(music)
The first question is what is it?
And I think
faculty and everybody is still trying to
get their hands around exactly what is
business analytics and
what is data science.
We certainly know
the components of it.
But it's morphing and
changing and growing.
I mean the last three years
deep learning has just
been added into the mix.
Neural networks have been
around for 20 or 30 years.
20 years ago, I would teach
neural networks in a class
and you really couldn't
do very much with them.
And now some researchers have come up with
multi-layer neural networks
in Toronto in particular
the University of Toronto.
And that technology is
now rapidly expanding
it's being used by Google, by
Facebook, by lots of companies.
(music)